The New Heaven and The New Earth
God’s Word teaches;
That the New Heaven and the New Earth “wherein dwelleth righteousness” will be made by God and the redeemed shall dwell therein with God forever. This present earth which has been polluted by sin will pass away after the Great White Throne Judgement - Psalm 102:25,26; Isaiah 51:6; 65:17; Matthew 5:18; 24:35; 2 Peter 3:10-13; Revelation 21:1. No unclean thing will be there. There, we shall know each other, our knowledge having been perfected. There will be no more curse upon anything. There will be no more night; the glory of the Lord will be the light thereof - Isaiah 66:22; 2 Peter 3:12,13; I Corinthians 13:12; I John 3:2,3; Revelation 21:1-7; 22:1-5.

The present age in which we live is referred to in scriptures as the “last days” (Hebrews 1:1,2). This age is very significant in the plan of God as it ushers us into another important series of events often called in theology as “eschatology”. Also called the church age, our present age is marked by evil, the dominion of Satan, darkness, ungodliness, lust, murder, lying and all manner of sin (Ephesians 6:12; Galatians 1:4). The church is not left out. There is, and there will be a denial of God, Christ, faith, sound doctrine and Christian living (1 Timothy 4:1-4; 2 Timothy 4:3,4; 3:1-8). The land is under a curse (Genesis 3:17). The devil and all his fallen angels walk to and fro the whole earth. The atmospheric heavens are polluted by the activities of Satan. The believers today groan under the harsh and hard conditions of the earth. They look forward to a change - a new heaven and new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness and holiness. God has the ultimate plan to judge sinners who remain obstinate to the call of God to repentance. “And whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire” Revelation 20:15. With the final judgement of sinners, God’s divine plan is to replace this polluted evil earth and atmospheric heavens with a new earth and a new heaven that will match His glory, holiness and righteousness (Revelation 21:1-7). “For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor come in to mind ” (Isaiah 65;17). This gives a good picture of what shall become of the present earth and heavens. All what we may call beautiful edifices and empires today will melt away in fervent heat because “... the heavens and the earth, which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men” (2 Peter 3:7,10-14). The glories of men and all the so-called “wonders” of the world shall not stand this fervent heat. Herein is wisdom: believers should lay up their treasures in heaven, not on earth “where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal” (Matthew 6:19).

This new creation is entirely free from any taint of sin and therefore the consequences and effect of sin are absent. Here, there is neither death, sorrow, pain, tears, nor separation from God (2 Peter 3:13; Revelation 21:4). As God created the present heavens and earth, so will He create the new heavens and a new earth - NEW in quality and in TIME. The great, holy and eternal heaven will have new Jerusalem as its capital. This is the capital of the eternal state called the “Bride” because of its virgin beauty, unstained with sin. Here, Christ and all the saints, from all ages will reside forevermore. Indeed, all things will be new. “Behold, I make all things new”. This is the eternal destiny of the saints from all ages. This is the place Jesus spoke about, “And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also” (John 14:3). It is certain that all believers with current experience of salvation shall appear with Him in glory and be like Him (Revelation 21:3; Colossians 3:4).

The Holy City, New Jerusalem, is a material city not a mystical one. Its beauty is beyond human description. About 15,000 miles in length and a breadth and height of about 15,000 miles, the streets are made of pure gold, as clear as glass. With walls of jasper and its twelve foundations garnished with all manner of precious stones, it has twelve gates of twelve pearls. The entire city wall is pure gold, as clear as glass. This is a city without any temple. The Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it. “And the city has no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof” (Revelation 21:23). The redeemed of all the earth shall bring their glory and honour into the city. This is a city whose gates are never shut (Revelation 21:16-26). The pure river of the water of life, clear as crystal, proceeds out of the throne of God and the Lamb. The tree of life by the sides of this river bears twelve manner of fruits monthly. The fruits and leaves are for the healing of the nations. “And there shall be no night there; and they need no candle, neither light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them light: and they shall reign for ever and ever” (Revelation 22:5). Words are insufficient to describe this new creation. But what will it take to partake in this inheritance?


In order to partake in this new inheritance, sinners must repent and believers must overcome. “He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my son”(Revelation 21:7). We must overcome the world (1 John 5:4,5; 2:15-17) and Satan (Revelation 12:11). False prophets, sin and evil must not have dominion over us. We must flee from all appearances of evil (1 Thessalonians 5:22; Romans 12:17-21). Whether there be persecutions or temptations, we must overcome to be part of this great inheritance (Revelation 2:10,26-28). The overcomer is the one that prevails and triumphs over all the works of the devil.

The sinner must be thirsty for righteousness and salvation because it will be costly to miss this glorious experience in the new heavens and the new earth. Christ promises to... “give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of water of life freely” (Revelation 21:6). Sinners must repent today. Backsliders must return to the Saviour immediately!

The life of the redeemed in this eternal city will be glorious. It will be a life of fellowship (1 Corinthians 13:12), rest (Revelation 14:13), full knowledge (1 Corinthians 13:12), holiness (Revelation 21:27), joy (Revelation 21:4), service (Revelation 22:3), abundance (Revelation 21:6), glory (2 Corinthians 4:17) and worship (Revelation 19:1; 7:9-12).

“But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the second death” (Revelation 21:8). There is punishment for the unrepentant and coward who would rather chose to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. They will suffer torment eternally in the lake of fire. We have only one life to live (Hebrews 9:27), therefore the believer must remain faithful and steadfast in the Lord, the sinner must repent and be saved and the backslider must come back home and be restored. Negligence of this “so great salvation” will be unfortunate. We should not miss the glories of the New Heaven and the New Earth. “Behold, I come quickly: hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown. Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new name. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches” (Revelation 3:11-13).